_8.3: Solicitation_

_Sweet cream ladies, forward march, the world owes you a living. Sweet
cream ladies, do your part, think of what you’re giving, to the lost and
lonely people of the night._[1]

In addition to prohibiting advertising, bar associations historically
also prohibited attorneys from "soliciting” clients, or approaching
potential clients directly, rather than as members of the general
public. For example, Canon 28 of the 1908 ABA Canons of Professional
Ethics specifically proscribed attorneys from volunteering legal advice
to a stranger or seeking out injured parties in the hope of providing
legal advice.

Indeed, bar associations typically monitored and punished solicitation
considerably more aggressively than advertisement. The stated objection
to solicitation was the concern that unscrupulous attorneys might take
advantage of unsophisticated members of the public, who lacked the
capacity to evaluate the quality of their legal services or the fairness
of their fees. Of course, the bar associations were also dominated by
successful attorneys at large firms, who tended to represent corporate
defendants, rather than injured plaintiffs.

[Model Rule 7.3: Solicitation of
Clients_](https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_7_3_direct_contact_with_prospective_clients/)

1. "Solicitation” or "solicit” denotes a communication initiated by or
 on behalf of a lawyer or law firm that is directed to a specific
 person the lawyer knows or reasonably should know needs legal
 services in a particular matter and that offers to provide, or
 reasonably can be understood as offering to provide, legal
 services for that matter.

2. A lawyer shall not solicit professional employment by live
 person-to-person contact when a significant motive for the
 lawyer’s doing so is the lawyer’s or law firm’s pecuniary gain,
 unless the contact is with a:

 1. Lawyer;

 2. person who has a family, close personal, or prior business or
 professional relationship with the lawyer or law firm; or

 3. person who routinely uses for business purposes the type of
 legal services offered by the lawyer.

3. A lawyer shall not solicit professional employment even when not
 otherwise prohibited by paragraph (b), if:

 1. the target of the solicitation has made known to the lawyer a
 desire not to be solicited by the lawyer; or

 2. the solicitation involves coercion, duress or harassment.

4. This Rule does not prohibit communications authorized by law or
 ordered by a court or other tribunal.

[Model Rule 7.3:
Comments_](https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_7_3_direct_contact_with_prospective_clients/comment_on_rule_7_3/)

1. Paragraph (b) prohibits a lawyer from soliciting professional
 employment by live person-to-person contact when a significant
 motive for the lawyer’s doing so is the lawyer’s or the law firm’s
 pecuniary gain. A lawyer’s communication is not a solicitation if
 it is directed to the general public, such as through a billboard,
 an Internet banner advertisement, a website or a television
 commercial, or if it is in response to a request for information
 or is automatically generated in response to electronic searches.

2. "Live person-to-person contact” means in-person, face-to-face, live
 telephone and other real-time visual or auditory person-to-person
 communications where the person is subject to a direct personal
 encounter without time for reflection. Such person-to-person
 contact does not include chat rooms, text messages or other
 written communications that recipients may easily disregard. A
 potential for overreaching exists when a lawyer, seeking pecuniary
 gain, solicits a person known to be in need of legal services.
 This form of contact subjects a person to the private importuning
 of the trained advocate in a direct interpersonal encounter. The
 person, who may already feel overwhelmed by the circumstances
 giving rise to the need for legal services, may find it difficult
 to fully evaluate all available alternatives with reasoned
 judgment and appropriate self‑interest in the face of the lawyer’s
 presence and insistence upon an immediate response. The situation
 is fraught with the possibility of undue influence, intimidation,
 and overreaching.

<!-- -->

8. Communications authorized by law or ordered by a court or tribunal
 include a notice to potential members of a class in class action
 litigation.

<img src="/assets/images/image4.png" style="width:3.76042in;height:5.28125in" />

[_Shapero v. Kentucky Bar Assn._, 486 U.S. 466
(1988)_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=10781928571449440206)

_Summary:_ Shapero wanted to send a letter advertising his legal
> services to people with foreclosure actions filed against them. The
> Kentucky Supreme Court held that Model Rule of Professional Conduct
> 7.3 prohibited direct mail solicitation. The Supreme Court reversed,
> holding that a direct mail solicitation was no different from an
> advertisement, and was protected by the 1st Amendment. The dissent
> argued that the court had gone too far in limiting regulation of
> attorney advertising and solicitation, and that advertising would harm
> the profession.

JUSTICE BRENNAN announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the
opinion of the Court as to Parts I and II and an opinion as to Part III
in which JUSTICE MARSHALL, JUSTICE BLACKMUN, and JUSTICE KENNEDY join.

This case presents the issue whether a State may, consistent with the
First and Fourteenth Amendments, categorically prohibit lawyers from
soliciting legal business for pecuniary gain by sending truthful and
nondeceptive letters to potential clients known to face particular legal
problems.

I

In 1985, petitioner, a member of Kentucky’s integrated Bar Association,
applied to the Kentucky Attorneys Advertising Commission for approval of
a letter that he proposed to send "to potential clients who have had a
foreclosure suit filed against them.” The proposed letter read as
follows:

> It has come to my attention that your home is being foreclosed on. If
> this is true, you may be about to lose your home. Federal law may
> allow you to keep your home by ORDERING your creditor to STOP and give
> you more time to pay them.
>
> You may call my office anytime from 8:30 a. m. to 5:00 p. m. for FREE
> information on how you can keep your home.
>
> Call NOW, don't wait. It may surprise you what I may be able to do for
> you. Just call and tell me that you got this letter. Remember it is
> FREE, there is NO charge for calling.

The Commission did not find the letter false or misleading.
Nevertheless, it declined to approve petitioner's proposal on the ground
that a then-existing Kentucky Supreme Court Rule prohibited the mailing
or delivery of written advertisements "precipitated by a specific event
or occurrence involving or relating to the addressee or addressees as
distinct from the general public.” The Commission registered its view
that Rule 3.135(5)(b)(i)’s ban on targeted, direct-mail advertising
violated the First Amendment — specifically the principles enunciated in
_Zauderer_ — and recommended that the Kentucky Supreme Court amend its
Rules. Pursuing the Commission's suggestion, petitioner petitioned the
Committee on Legal Ethics of the Kentucky Bar Association for an
advisory opinion as to the Rule’s validity. Like the Commission, the
Ethics Committee, in an opinion formally adopted by the Board of
Governors of the Bar Association, did not find the proposed letter false
or misleading, but nonetheless upheld Rule 3.135(5)(b) (i) on the ground
that it was consistent with Rule 7.3 of the American Bar Association’s
Model Rules of Professional Conduct.

On review of the Ethics Committee’s advisory opinion, the Kentucky
Supreme Court felt "compelled by the decision in Zauderer to order Rule
3.135(5)(b)(i) deleted,” and replaced it with the ABA’s Rule 7.3.

The court did not specify either the precise infirmity in Rule
3.135(5)(b)(i) or how Rule 7.3 cured it. Rule 7.3, like its predecessor,
prohibits targeted, direct-mail solicitation by lawyers for pecuniary
gain, without a particularized finding that the solicitation is false or
misleading. We granted certiorari to resolve whether such a blanket
prohibition is consistent with the First Amendment and now reverse.

II

Lawyer advertising is in the category of constitutionally protected
commercial speech. The First Amendment principles governing state
regulation of lawyer solicitations for pecuniary gain are by now
familiar: "Commercial speech that is not false or deceptive and does not
concern unlawful activities may be restricted only in the service of a
substantial governmental interest, and only through means that directly
advance that interest.” Since state regulation of commercial speech "may
extend only as far as the interest it serves,” state rules that are
designed to prevent the "potential for deception and confusion may be no
broader than reasonably necessary to prevent the” perceived evil.

Our lawyer advertising cases have never distinguished among various
modes of written advertising to the general public. Thus, Ohio could no
more prevent Zauderer from mass-mailing to a general population his
offer to represent women injured by the Dalkon Shield than it could
prohibit his publication of the advertisement in local newspapers.
Similarly, if petitioner’s letter is neither false nor deceptive,
Kentucky could not constitutionally prohibit him from sending at large
an identical letter opening with the query, "Is your home being
foreclosed on?,” rather than his observation to the targeted individuals
that "It has come to my attention that your home is being foreclosed
on.” The drafters of Rule 7.3 apparently appreciated as much, for the
Rule exempts from the ban "letters addressed or advertising circulars
distributed generally to persons who are so situated that they might in
general find such services useful.”

The court below disapproved petitioner’s proposed letter solely because
it targeted only persons who were "known to need the legal services”
offered in his letter, rather than the broader group of persons "so
situated that they might in general find such services useful.”
Generally, unless the advertiser is inept, the latter group would
include members of the former. The only reason to disseminate an
advertisement of particular legal services among those persons who are
"so situated that they might in general find such services useful” is to
reach individuals who actually "need legal services of the kind provided
and advertised by the lawyer.” But the First Amendment does not permit a
ban on certain speech merely because it is more efficient; the State may
not constitutionally ban a particular letter on the theory that to mail
it only to those whom it would most interest is somehow inherently
objectionable.

The court below did not rely on any such theory. Rather, it concluded
that the State’s blanket ban on all targeted, direct-mail solicitation
was permissible because of the "serious potential for abuse inherent in
direct solicitation by lawyers of potential clients known to need
specific legal services.” The court observed:

> Such solicitation subjects the prospective client to pressure from a
> trained lawyer in a direct personal way. It is entirely possible that
> the potential client may feel overwhelmed by the basic situation which
> caused the need for the specific legal services and may have seriously
> impaired capacity for good judgment, sound reason and a natural
> protective self-interest. Such a condition is full of the possibility
> of undue influence, overreaching and intimidation.

Of course, a particular potential client will feel equally "overwhelmed”
by his legal troubles and will have the same "impaired capacity for good
judgment” regardless of whether a lawyer mails him an untargeted letter
or exposes him to a newspaper advertisement — concededly
constitutionally protected activities — or instead mails a targeted
letter. The relevant inquiry is not whether there exist potential
clients whose "condition” makes them susceptible to undue influence, but
whether the mode of communication poses a serious danger that lawyers
will exploit any such susceptibility.

In assessing the potential for overreaching and undue influence, the
mode of communication makes all the difference. Our decision in
_Ohralik_ that a State could categorically ban all in-person
solicitation turned on two factors. First was our characterization of
face-to-face solicitation as "a practice rife with possibilities for
overreaching, invasion of privacy, the exercise of undue influence, and
outright fraud.” Second, "unique difficulties” would frustrate any
attempt at state regulation of in-person solicitation short of an
absolute ban because such solicitation is "not visible or otherwise open
to public scrutiny.” Targeted, direct-mail solicitation is
distinguishable from the in-person solicitation in each respect.

Like print advertising, petitioner’s letter — and targeted, direct-mail
solicitation generally — "poses much less risk of overreaching or undue
influence” than does in-person solicitation. Neither mode of written
communication involves "the coercive force of the personal presence of a
trained advocate” or the "pressure on the potential client for an
immediate yes-or-no answer to the offer of representation.” Unlike the
potential client with a badgering advocate breathing down his neck, the
recipient of a letter and the "reader of an advertisement can
effectively avoid further bombardment of his sensibilities simply by
averting his eyes.” A letter, like a printed advertisement (but unlike a
lawyer), can readily be put in a drawer to be considered later, ignored,
or discarded. In short, both types of written solicitation "convey
information about legal services by means that are more conducive to
reflection and the exercise of choice on the part of the consumer than
is personal solicitation by an attorney.” Nor does a targeted letter
invade the recipient’s privacy any more than does a substantively
identical letter mailed at large. The invasion, if any, occurs when the
lawyer discovers the recipient’s legal affairs, not when he confronts
the recipient with the discovery.

Admittedly, a letter that is personalized (not merely targeted) to the
recipient presents an increased risk of deception, intentional or
inadvertent. It could, in certain circumstances, lead the recipient to
overestimate the lawyer's familiarity with the case or could implicitly
suggest that the recipient’s legal problem is more dire than it really
is. Similarly, an inaccurately targeted letter could lead the recipient
to believe she has a legal problem that she does not actually have or,
worse yet, could offer erroneous legal advice.

But merely because targeted, direct-mail solicitation presents lawyers
with opportunities for isolated abuses or mistakes does not justify a
total ban on that mode of protected commercial speech. The State can
regulate such abuses and minimize mistakes through far less restrictive
and more precise means, the most obvious of which is to require the
lawyer to file any solicitation letter with a state agency, giving the
State ample opportunity to supervise mailings and penalize actual
abuses. The "regulatory difficulties” that are "unique” to in-person
lawyer solicitation — solicitation that is "not visible or otherwise
open to public scrutiny” and for which it is "difficult or impossible to
obtain reliable proof of what actually took place” — do not apply to
written solicitations. The court below offered no basis for its "belief
that submission of a blank form letter to the Advertising Commission
does not provide a suitable protection to the public from overreaching,
intimidation or misleading private targeted mail solicitation.” Its
concerns were presumably those expressed by the ABA House of Delegates
in its comment to Rule 7.3:

> State lawyer discipline agencies struggle for resources to investigate
> specific complaints, much less for those necessary to screen lawyers’
> mail solicitation material. Even if they could examine such materials,
> agency staff members are unlikely to know anything about the lawyer or
> about the prospective client's underlying problem. Without such
> knowledge they cannot determine whether the lawyer's representations
> are misleading.

The record before us furnishes no evidence that scrutiny of targeted
solicitation letters will be appreciably more burdensome or less
reliable than scrutiny of advertisements. As a general matter,
evaluating a targeted advertisement does not require specific
information about the recipient's identity and legal problems any more
than evaluating a newspaper advertisement requires like information
about all readers. If the targeted letter specifies facts that relate to
particular recipients, the reviewing agency has innumerable options to
minimize mistakes. It might, for example, require the lawyer to prove
the truth of the fact stated; it could require the lawyer to explain
briefly how he or she discovered the fact and verified its accuracy; or
it could require the letter to bear a label identifying it as an
advertisement, or directing the recipient how to report inaccurate or
misleading letters. To be sure, a state agency or bar association that
reviews solicitation letters might have more work than one that does
not. But "our recent decisions involving commercial speech have been
grounded in the faith that the free flow of commercial information is
valuable enough to justify imposing on would-be regulators the costs of
distinguishing the truthful from the false, the helpful from the
misleading, and the harmless from the harmful.”

III

The validity of Rule 7.3 does not turn on whether petitioner’s letter
itself exhibited any of the evils at which Rule 7.3 was directed. Since,
however, the First Amendment overbreadth doctrine does not apply to
professional advertising, we address respondent’s contentions that
petitioner’s letter is particularly overreaching, and therefore unworthy
of First Amendment protection. In that regard, respondent identifies two
features of the letter before us that, in its view, coalesce to convert
the proposed letter into "high pressure solicitation, overbearing
solicitation,” which is not protected. First, respondent asserts that
the letter’s liberal use of underscored, uppercase letters "fairly
shouts at the recipient that he should employ Shapero.” Second,
respondent objects that the letter contains assertions that "state no
affirmative or objective fact,” but constitute "pure salesman puffery,
enticement for the unsophisticated, which commits Shapero to nothing.”

The pitch or style of a letter's type and its inclusion of subjective
predictions of client satisfaction might catch the recipient’s attention
more than would a bland statement of purely objective facts in small
type. But a truthful and non-deceptive letter, no matter how big its
type and how much it speculates can never "shout at the recipient” or
"grasp him by the lapels,” as can a lawyer engaging in face-to-face
solicitation. The letter simply presents no comparable risk of
overreaching. And so long as the First Amendment protects the right to
solicit legal business, the State may claim no substantial interest in
restricting truthful and nondeceptive lawyer solicitations to those
least likely to be read by the recipient. Moreover, the First Amendment
limits the State’s authority to dictate what information an attorney may
convey in soliciting legal business. "The States may not place an
absolute prohibition on certain types of potentially misleading
information if the information may also be presented in a way that is
not deceptive,” unless the State "asserts a substantial interest” that
such a restriction would directly advance. Nor may a State impose a more
particularized restriction without a similar showing. Aside from the
interests that we have already rejected, respondent offers none.

To be sure, a letter may be misleading if it unduly emphasizes trivial
or "relatively uninformative facts,” or offers overblown assurances of
client satisfaction. Respondent does not argue before us that
petitioner’s letter was misleading in those respects. Nor does
respondent contend that the letter is false or misleading in any other
respect. Of course, respondent is free to raise, and the Kentucky courts
are free to consider, any such argument on remand.

The judgment of the Supreme Court of Kentucky is reversed, and the case
is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

JUSTICE O'CONNOR, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE SCALIA join,
dissenting.

I agree with the Court that the reasoning in _Zauderer_ supports the
conclusion reached today. That decision, however, was itself the
culmination of a line of cases built on defective premises and flawed
reasoning. As today's decision illustrates, the Court has been unable or
unwilling to restrain the logic of the underlying analysis within
reasonable bounds. The resulting interference with important and valid
public policies is so destructive that I believe the analytical
framework itself should now be reexamined.

I

Zauderer held that the First Amendment was violated by a state rule that
forbade attorneys to solicit or accept employment through advertisements
containing information or advice regarding a specific legal problem. I
dissented from this holding because I believed that our precedents
permitted, and good judgment required, that we give greater deference to
the State’s legitimate efforts to regulate advertising by their
attorneys. Emphasizing the important differences between professional
services and standardized consumer products, I concluded that
unsolicited legal advice was not analogous to the free samples that are
often used to promote sales in other contexts. First, the quality of
legal services is typically more difficult for most laypersons to
evaluate, and the consequences of a mistaken evaluation of the "free
sample” may be much more serious. For that reason, the practice of
offering unsolicited legal advice as a means of enticing potential
clients into a professional relationship is much more likely to be
misleading than superficially similar practices in the sale of ordinary
consumer goods. Second, and more important, an attorney has an
obligation to provide clients with complete and disinterested advice.
The advice contained in unsolicited "free samples” is likely to be
colored by the lawyer's own interest in drumming up business, a result
that is sure to undermine the professional standards that States have a
substantial interest in maintaining.

III

The roots of the error in our attorney advertising cases are a defective
analogy between professional services and standardized consumer products
and a correspondingly inappropriate skepticism about the States’
justifications for their regulations.

Even if I agreed that this Court should take upon itself the task of
deciding what forms of attorney advertising are in the public interest,
I would not agree with what it has done. The best arguments in favor of
rules permitting attorneys to advertise are founded in elementary
economic principles. Restrictions on truthful advertising, which
artificially interfere with the ability of suppliers to transmit price
information to consumers, presumably reduce the efficiency of the
mechanisms of supply and demand. Other factors being equal, this should
cause or enable suppliers (in this case attorneys) to maintain a
price/quality ratio in some of their services that is higher than would
otherwise prevail. Although one could probably not test this hypothesis
empirically, it is inherently plausible. Nor is it implausible to
imagine that one effect of restrictions on lawyer advertising, and
perhaps sometimes an intended effect, is to enable attorneys to charge
their clients more for some services (of a given quality) than they
would be able to charge absent the restrictions.

Assuming, arguendo, that the removal of advertising restrictions should
lead in the short run to increased efficiency in the provision of legal
services, I would not agree that we can safely assume the same effect in
the long run. The economic argument against these restrictions ignores
the delicate role they may play in preserving the norms of the legal
profession. While it may be difficult to defend this role with precise
economic logic, I believe there is a powerful argument in favor of
restricting lawyer advertising and that this argument is at the very
least not easily refuted by economic analysis.

One distinguishing feature of any profession, unlike other occupations
that may be equally respectable, is that membership entails an ethical
obligation to temper one’s selfish pursuit of economic success by
adhering to standards of conduct that could not be enforced either by
legal fiat or through the discipline of the market. There are sound
reasons to continue pursuing the goal that is implicit in the
traditional view of professional life. Both the special privileges
incident to membership in the profession and the advantages those
privileges give in the necessary task of earning a living are means to a
goal that transcends the accumulation of wealth. That goal is public
service, which in the legal profession can take a variety of familiar
forms. This view of the legal profession need not be rooted in
romanticism or self-serving sanctimony, though of course it can be.
Rather, special ethical standards for lawyers are properly understood as
an appropriate means of restraining lawyers in the exercise of the
unique power that they inevitably wield in a political system like ours.

It is worth recalling why lawyers are regulated at all, or to a greater
degree than most other occupations, and why history is littered with
failed attempts to extinguish lawyers as a special class. Operating a
legal system that is both reasonably efficient and tolerably fair cannot
be accomplished, at least under modern social conditions, without a
trained and specialized body of experts. This training is one element of
what we mean when we refer to the law as a "learned profession.” Such
knowledge by its nature cannot be made generally available, and it
therefore confers the power and the temptation to manipulate the system
of justice for one's own ends. Such manipulation can occur in at least
two obvious ways. One results from overly zealous representation of the
client’s interests; abuse of the discovery process is one example whose
causes and effects (if not its cure) is apparent. The second, and for
present purposes the more relevant, problem is abuse of the client for
the lawyer’s benefit. Precisely because lawyers must be provided with
expertise that is both esoteric and extremely powerful, it would be
unrealistic to demand that clients bargain for their services in the
same arm’s-length manner that may be appropriate when buying an
automobile or choosing a dry cleaner. Like physicians, lawyers are
subjected to heightened ethical demands on their conduct towards those
they serve. These demands are needed because market forces, and the
ordinary legal prohibitions against force and fraud, are simply
insufficient to protect the consumers of their necessary services from
the peculiar power of the specialized knowledge that these professionals
possess.

Imbuing the legal profession with the necessary ethical standards is a
task that involves a constant struggle with the relentless natural force
of economic self-interest. It cannot be accomplished directly by legal
rules, and it certainly will not succeed if sermonizing is the strongest
tool that may be employed. Tradition and experiment have suggested a
number of formal and informal mechanisms, none of which is adequate by
itself and many of which may serve to reduce competition (in the narrow
economic sense) among members of the profession. A few examples include
the great efforts made during this century to improve the quality and
breadth of the legal education that is required for admission to the
bar; the concomitant attempt to cultivate a subclass of genuine scholars
within the profession; the development of bar associations that aspire
to be more than trade groups; strict disciplinary rules about conflicts
of interest and client abandonment; and promotion of the expectation
that an attorney's history of voluntary public service is a relevant
factor in selecting judicial candidates.

Restrictions on advertising and solicitation by lawyers properly and
significantly serve the same goal. Such restrictions act as a concrete,
day-to-day reminder to the practicing attorney of why it is improper for
any member of this profession to regard it as a trade or occupation like
any other. There is no guarantee, of course, that the restrictions will
always have the desired effect, and they are surely not a sufficient
means to their proper goal. Given their inevitable anticompetitive
effects, moreover, they should not be thoughtlessly retained or
insulated from skeptical criticism. Appropriate modifications have been
made in the light of reason and experience, and other changes may be
suggested in the future.

In my judgment, however, fairly severe constraints on attorney
advertising can continue to play an important role in preserving the
legal profession as a genuine profession. Whatever may be the exactly
appropriate scope of these restrictions at a given time and place, this
Court’s recent decisions reflect a myopic belief that "consumers,” and
thus our Nation, will benefit from a constitutional theory that refuses
to recognize either the essence of professionalism or its fragile and
necessary foundations. In one way or another, time will uncover the
folly of this approach. I can only hope that the Court will recognize
the danger before it is too late to effect a worthwhile cure.

_Questions:_

1. Richard D. Shapero died at his home in Louisville, Kentucky on
 December 31, 2006, at 63. According to his
 [obituary](https://www.legacy.com/obituaries/louisville/obituary.aspx?n=richard-d-shapero&pid=20505492),
 "Richard was an attorney and Pin Ball Wizard. Richard’s U.S.
 Supreme Court Case, Shapero vs. Kentucky Bar Association
 established laws regarding lawyer advertising in the United
 States.” His colleagues also
 [remembered](http://www.louisvilledivorce.com/farewell-legal-advertising-trailblazer-richard-d-shapero)
 him fondly, "As we were pondering our past and setting goals for
 our future, Richard D. Shapero died yesterday at age 63. He will
 always be remembered for taking the Kentucky Bar Association to
 the United States Supreme Court, which resulted in a significant
 opinion striking down bar restrictions on lawyer advertising. A
 gutsy guy, lightyears ahead of his time, he enjoyed the business
 side of law much more than the actual practice of law. His forte
 was bringing in P.I. cases and then farming them out to other
 attorneys. His trademark, long before other lawfirms thought of
 tag lines or trademarks, was ‘I Know The Experts.’ His early TV
 ads made traditional lawyers cringe, but he spoke a language lay
 people understood and they hired him.”

2. The majority found a direct mail solicitation indistinguishable from
 an advertisement to the public. Do you agree? Is it reasonable to
 be more concerned about solicitation of potential clients who
 appear to need legal assistance than advertisements directed at
 the general public? Or perhaps we should encourage attorneys to
 offer legal services to potential clients who are most in need of
 them?

3. The dissent argues that advertisements and solicitation are debasing
 the profession and its ethical standards. Have its concerns borne
 fruit?

_Further Reading:_

- [David O. Stewart & Scott Nelson, _Hawking Legal
 Services_, ABA Journal, August 1, 1988, at
 44](https://books.google.com/books?id=XOjjli7ncX8C&pg=PA44&lpg=PA44&dq=%22Richard+D.+SHAPERO%22&source=bl&ots=GG77fC5vud&sig=ACfU3U0pa8Ypi8HDbHMz-d0He3U0nVtR6w&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwitzI2_lK_hAhVLPq0KHaaDBiY4ChDoATABegQICRAB#v=onepage&q=%22Richard%20D.%20SHAPERO%22&f=false)

[_Florida Bar v. Went For It, Inc._, 515 U.S. 618
(1995)_](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=9524077868218834965)

Justice O’Connor delivered the opinion of the Court.

Rules of the Florida Bar prohibit personal injury lawyers from sending
targeted direct-mail solicitations to victims and their relatives for 30
days following an accident or disaster. This case asks us to consider
whether such Rules violate the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the
Constitution. We hold that in the circumstances presented here, they do
not.

I

In 1989, the Florida Bar completed a 2-year study of the effects of
lawyer advertising on public opinion. After conducting hearings,
commissioning surveys, and reviewing extensive public commentary, the
Bar determined that several changes to its advertising rules were in
order. In late 1990, the Florida Supreme Court adopted the Bar’s
proposed amendments with some modifications. Two of these amendments are
at issue in this case. Rule 4-7.4(b)(1) provides that "a lawyer shall
not send, or knowingly permit to be sent, a written communication to a
prospective client for the purpose of obtaining professional employment
if: (A) the written communication concerns an action for personal injury
or wrongful death or otherwise relates to an accident or disaster
involving the person to whom the communication is addressed or a
relative of that person, unless the accident or disaster occurred more
than 30 days prior to the mailing of the communication." Rule 4-7.8(a)
states that "a lawyer shall not accept referrals from a lawyer referral
service unless the service: (1) engages in no communication with the
public and in no direct contact with prospective clients in a manner
that would violate the Rules of Professional Conduct if the
communication or contact were made by the lawyer.” Together, these Rules
create a brief 30-day blackout period after an accident during which
lawyers may not, directly or indirectly, single out accident victims or
their relatives in order to solicit their business.

In March 1992, G. Stewart McHenry and his wholly owned lawyer referral
service, Went For It, Inc., filed this action for declaratory and
injunctive relief in the United States District Court for the Middle
District of Florida challenging Rules 4-7.4(b)(1) and 4-7.8(a) as
violative of the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution.
McHenry alleged that he routinely sent targeted solicitations to
accident victims or their survivors within 30 days after accidents and
that he wished to continue doing so in the future. Went For It, Inc.,
represented that it wished to contact accident victims or their
survivors within 30 days of accidents and to refer potential clients to
participating Florida lawyers. In October 1992, McHenry was disbarred
for reasons unrelated to this suit. Another Florida lawyer, John T.
Blakely, was substituted in his stead.

The District Court referred the parties’ competing summary judgment
motions to a Magistrate Judge, who concluded that the Bar had
substantial government interests, predicated on a concern for
professionalism, both in protecting the personal privacy and tranquility
of recent accident victims and their relatives and in ensuring that
these individuals do not fall prey to undue influence or overreaching.
Citing the Bar’s extensive study, the Magistrate Judge found that the
Rules directly serve those interests and sweep no further than
reasonably necessary. The Magistrate recommended that the District Court
grant the Bar’s motion for summary judgment on the ground that the Rules
pass constitutional muster.

The District Court rejected the Magistrate Judge’s report and
recommendations and entered summary judgment for the plaintiffs, relying
on _Bates v. State Bar of Ariz._ and subsequent cases. The Eleventh
Circuit affirmed on similar grounds. The panel noted, in its conclusion,
that it was "disturbed that _Bates_ and its progeny require the
decision” that it reached. We granted certiorari, and now reverse.

II

A

Nearly two decades of cases have built upon the foundation laid by
_Bates_. It is now well established that lawyer advertising is
commercial speech and, as such, is accorded a measure of First Amendment
protection. Such First Amendment protection, of course, is not absolute.
We have always been careful to distinguish commercial speech from speech
at the First Amendment's core. "Commercial speech enjoys a limited
measure of protection, commensurate with its subordinate position in the
scale of First Amendment values, and is subject to modes of regulation
that might be impermissible in the realm of noncommercial expression.”
We have observed that "to require a parity of constitutional protection
for commercial and noncommercial speech alike could invite dilution,
simply by a leveling process, of the force of the Amendment’s guarantee
with respect to the latter kind of speech.”

Mindful of these concerns, we engage in "intermediate” scrutiny of
restrictions on commercial speech, analyzing them under the framework
set forth in _Central Hudson_. Under _Central Hudson_, the government
may freely regulate commercial speech that concerns unlawful activity or
is misleading. Commercial speech that falls into neither of those
categories, like the advertising at issue here, may be regulated if the
government satisfies a test consisting of three related prongs: First,
the government must assert a substantial interest in support of its
regulation; second, the government must demonstrate that the restriction
on commercial speech directly and materially advances that interest; and
third, the regulation must be "narrowly drawn.”

B

The Bar asserts that it has a substantial interest in protecting the
privacy and tranquility of personal injury victims and their loved ones
against intrusive, unsolicited contact by lawyers. This interest
obviously factors into the Bar’s paramount (and repeatedly professed)
objective of curbing activities that "negatively affect the
administration of justice.” Because direct-mail solicitations in the
wake of accidents are perceived by the public as intrusive, the Bar
argues, the reputation of the legal profession in the eyes of Floridians
has suffered commensurately. The regulation, then, is an effort to
protect the flagging reputations of Florida lawyers by preventing them
from engaging in conduct that, the Bar maintains, "is universally
regarded as deplorable and beneath common decency because of its
intrusion upon the special vulnerability and private grief of victims or
their families.”

We have little trouble crediting the Bar’s interest as substantial. On
various occasions we have accepted the proposition that "States have a
compelling interest in the practice of professions within their
boundaries, and as part of their power to protect the public health,
safety, and other valid interests they have broad power to establish
standards for licensing practitioners and regulating the practice of
professions.” Our precedents also leave no room for doubt that "the
protection of potential clients’ privacy is a substantial state
interest.” In other contexts, we have consistently recognized that "the
State’s interest in protecting the well-being, tranquility, and privacy
of the home is certainly of the highest order in a free and civilized
society.” Indeed, we have noted that "a special benefit of the privacy
all citizens enjoy within their own walls, which the State may legislate
to protect, is an ability to avoid intrusions.”

Under _Central Hudson_’s second prong, the State must demonstrate that
the challenged regulation "advances the Government’s interest in a
direct and material way.” That burden, we have explained, "is not
satisfied by mere speculation or conjecture; rather, a governmental body
seeking to sustain a restriction on commercial speech must demonstrate
that the harms it recites are real and that its restriction will in fact
alleviate them to a material degree.”

The Bar submitted a 106-page summary of its 2-year study of lawyer
advertising and solicitation to the District Court. That summary
contains data—both statistical and anecdotal—supporting the Bar’s
contentions that the Florida public views direct-mail solicitations in
the immediate wake of accidents as an intrusion on privacy that reflects
poorly upon the profession. As of June 1989, lawyers mailed 700,000
direct solicitations in Florida annually, 40% of which were aimed at
accident victims or their survivors. A survey of Florida adults
commissioned by the Bar indicated that Floridians "have negative
feelings about those attorneys who use direct mail advertising.”
Fifty-four percent of the general population surveyed said that
contacting persons concerning accidents or similar events is a violation
of privacy. A random sampling of persons who received direct-mail
advertising from lawyers in 1987 revealed that 45% believed that
directmail solicitation is "designed to take advantage of gullible or
unstable people”; 34% found such tactics "annoying or irritating”; 26%
found it "an invasion of your privacy”; and 24% reported that it "made
you angry.” Significantly, 27% of direct-mail recipients reported that
their regard for the legal profession and for the judicial process as a
whole was "lower” as a result of receiving the direct mail.

The anecdotal record mustered by the Bar is noteworthy for its breadth
and detail. With titles like "Scavenger Lawyers” and "Solicitors Out of
Bounds,” newspaper editorial pages in Florida have burgeoned with
criticism of Florida lawyers who send targeted direct mail to victims
shortly after accidents. The study summary also includes page upon page
of excerpts from complaints of direct-mail recipients. For example, a
Florida citizen described how he was "appalled and angered by the brazen
attempt” of a law firm to solicit him by letter shortly after he was
injured and his fiancee was killed in an auto accident. Another found it
"despicable and inexcusable” that a Pensacola lawyer wrote to his mother
three days after his father’s funeral. Another described how she was
"astounded” and then "very angry” when she received a solicitation
following a minor accident. Still another described as "beyond
comprehension” a letter his nephew’s family received the day of the
nephew’s funeral. One citizen wrote, "I consider the unsolicited contact
from you after my child’s accident to be of the rankest form of
ambulance chasing and in incredibly poor taste. I cannot begin to
express with my limited vocabulary the utter contempt in which I hold
you and your kind.”

In light of this showing—which respondents at no time refuted, save by
the conclusory assertion that the Rule lacked "any factual basis”—we
conclude that the Bar has satisfied the second prong of the _Central
Hudson_ test. In dissent, Justice Kennedy complains that we have before
us few indications of the sample size or selection procedures employed
by Magid Associates (a nationally renowned consulting firm) and no
copies of the actual surveys employed. As stated, we believe the
evidence adduced by the Bar is sufficient. In any event, we do not read
our case law to require that empirical data come to us accompanied by a
surfeit of background information. Indeed, in other First Amendment
contexts, we have permitted litigants to justify speech restrictions by
reference to studies and anecdotes pertaining to different locales
altogether, or even, in a case applying strict scrutiny, to justify
restrictions based solely on history, consensus, and "simple common
sense.” After scouring the record, we are satisfied that the ban on
directmail solicitation in the immediate aftermath of accidents targets
a concrete, nonspeculative harm.

In reaching a contrary conclusion, the Court of Appeals determined that
this case was governed squarely by _Shapero_. Making no mention of the
Bar’s study, the court concluded that "a targeted letter does not invade
the recipient’s privacy any more than does a substantively identical
letter mailed at large. The invasion, if any, occurs when the lawyer
discovers the recipient’s legal affairs, not when he confronts the
recipient with the discovery.” In many cases, the Court of Appeals
explained, "this invasion of privacy will involve no more than reading
the newspaper.”

While some of _Shapero_’s language might be read to support the Court of
Appeals’ interpretation, _Shapero_ differs in several fundamental
respects from the case before us. First and foremost, _Shapero_’s
treatment of privacy was casual. Contrary to the dissent’s suggestions,
the State in _Shapero_ did not seek to justify its regulation as a
measure undertaken to prevent lawyers’ invasions of privacy interests.
Rather, the State focused exclusively on the special dangers of
overreaching inhering in targeted solicitations. Second, in contrast to
this case, _Shapero_ dealt with a broad ban on all direct-mail
solicitations, whatever the time frame and whoever the recipient.
Finally, the State in _Shapero_ assembled no evidence attempting to
demonstrate any actual harm caused by targeted direct mail. The Court
rejected the State’s effort to justify a prophylactic ban on the basis
of blanket, untested assertions of undue influence and overreaching.
Because the State did not make a privacy-based argument at all, its
empirical showing on that issue was similarly infirm.

We find the Court’s perfunctory treatment of privacy in _Shapero_ to be
of little utility in assessing this ban on targeted solicitation of
victims in the immediate aftermath of accidents. While it is undoubtedly
true that many people find the image of lawyers sifting through accident
and police reports in pursuit of prospective clients unpalatable and
invasive, this case targets a different kind of intrusion. The Bar has
argued, and the record reflects, that a principal purpose of the ban is
"protecting the personal privacy and tranquility of Florida’s citizens
from crass commercial intrusion by attorneys upon their personal grief
in times of trauma.” The intrusion targeted by the Bar’s regulation
stems not from the fact that a lawyer has learned about an accident or
disaster, but from the lawyer’s confrontation of victims or relatives
with such information, while wounds are still open, in order to solicit
their business. In this respect, an untargeted letter mailed to society
at large is different in kind from a targeted solicitation; the
untargeted letter involves no willful or knowing affront to or invasion
of the tranquility of bereaved or injured individuals and simply does
not cause the same kind of reputational harm to the profession unearthed
by the Bar’s study.

The purpose of the 30-day targeted direct-mail ban is to forestall the
outrage and irritation with the state-licensed legal profession that the
practice of direct solicitation only days after accidents has
engendered. The Bar is concerned not with citizens’ "offense” in the
abstract, but with the demonstrable detrimental effects that such
"offense” has on the profession it regulates. Moreover, the harm posited
by the Bar is as much a function of simple receipt of targeted
solicitations within days of accidents as it is a function of the
letters’ contents. Throwing the letter away shortly after opening it may
minimize the latter intrusion, but it does little to combat the former.

Passing to _Central Hudson_’s third prong, we examine the relationship
between the Bar’s interests and the means chosen to serve them. With
respect to this prong, the differences between commercial speech and
noncommercial speech are manifest. The "least restrictive means” test
has no role in the commercial speech context. "What our decisions
require,” instead, "is a fit between the legislature’s ends and the
means chosen to accomplish those ends, a fit that is not necessarily
perfect, but reasonable; that represents not necessarily the single best
disposition but one whose scope is in proportion to the interest served,
that employs not necessarily the least restrictive means, but a means
narrowly tailored to achieve the desired objective.” Of course, we do
not equate this test with the less rigorous obstacles of rational basis
review; in _Cincinnati v. Discovery_, for example, we observed that the
existence of "numerous and obvious less-burdensome alternatives to the
restriction on commercial speech is certainly a relevant consideration
in determining whether the fit between ends and means is reasonable.”

Respondents levy a great deal of criticism, at the scope of the Bar’s
restriction on targeted mail. "By prohibiting written communications to
all people, whatever their state of mind,” respondents charge, the Rule
"keeps useful information from those accident victims who are ready,
willing and able to utilize a lawyer’s advice.” This criticism may be
parsed into two components. First, the Rule does not distinguish between
victims in terms of the severity of their injuries. According to
respondents, the Rule is unconstitutionally overinclusive insofar as it
bans targeted mailings even to citizens whose injuries or grief are
relatively minor. Second, the Rule may prevent citizens from learning
about their legal options, particularly at a time when other
actors—opposing counsel and insurance adjusters—may be clamoring for
victims’ attentions. Any benefit arising from the Bar’s regulation,
respondents implicitly contend, is outweighed by these costs.

We are not persuaded by respondents’ allegations of constitutional
infirmity. We find little deficiency in the ban’s failure to distinguish
among injured Floridians by the severity of their pain or the intensity
of their grief. Indeed, it is hard to imagine the contours of a
regulation that might satisfy respondents on this score. Rather than
drawing difficult lines on the basis that some injuries are "severe” and
some situations appropriate (and others, presumably, inappropriate) for
grief, anger, or emotion, the Bar has crafted a ban applicable to all
postaccident or disaster solicitations for a brief 30-day period. Unlike
respondents, we do not see "numerous and obvious less-burdensome
alternatives” to Florida’s short temporal ban. The Bar’s rule is
reasonably well tailored to its stated objective of eliminating targeted
mailings whose type and timing are a source of distress to Floridians,
distress that has caused many of them to lose respect for the legal
profession.

Respondents’ second point would have force if the Bar’s Rule were not
limited to a brief period and if there were not many other ways for
injured Floridians to learn about the availability of legal
representation during that time. Our lawyer advertising cases have
afforded lawyers a great deal of leeway to devise innovative ways to
attract new business. Florida permits lawyers to advertise on prime-time
television and radio as well as in newspapers and other media. They may
rent space on billboards. They may send untargeted letters to the
general population, or to discrete segments thereof. There are, of
course, pages upon pages devoted to lawyers in the Yellow Pages of
Florida telephone directories. These listings are organized
alphabetically and by area of specialty. These ample alternative
channels for receipt of information about the availability of legal
representation during the 30-day period following accidents may explain
why, despite the ample evidence, testimony, and commentary submitted by
those favoring (as well as opposing) unrestricted direct-mail
solicitation, respondents have not pointed to—and we have not
independently found—a single example of an individual case in which
immediate solicitation helped to avoid, or failure to solicit within 30
days brought about, the harms that concern the dissent. In fact, the
record contains considerable empirical survey information suggesting
that Floridians have little difficulty finding a lawyer when they need
one. Finding no basis to question the commonsense conclusion that the
many alternative channels for communicating necessary information about
attorneys are sufficient, we see no defect in Florida’s regulation.

III

Speech by professionals obviously has many dimensions. There are
circumstances in which we will accord speech by attorneys on public
issues and matters of legal representation the strongest protection our
Constitution has to offer. This case, however, concerns pure commercial
advertising, for which we have always reserved a lesser degree of
protection under the First Amendment. Particularly because the standards
and conduct of state-licensed lawyers have traditionally been subject to
extensive regulation by the States, it is all the more appropriate that
we limit our scrutiny of state regulations to a level commensurate with
the "subordinate position” of commercial speech in the scale of First
Amendment values.

We believe that the Bar’s 30-day restriction on targeted direct-mail
solicitation of accident victims and their relatives withstands scrutiny
under the three-pronged Central Hudson test that we have devised for
this context. The Bar has substantial interest both in protecting
injured Floridians from invasive conduct by lawyers and in preventing
the erosion of confidence in the profession that such repeated invasions
have engendered. The Bar’s proffered study, unrebutted by respondents
below, provides evidence indicating that the harms it targets are far
from illusory. The palliative devised by the Bar to address these harms
is narrow both in scope and in duration. The Constitution, in our view,
requires nothing more.

Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Souter, and Justice
Ginsburg join, dissenting.

Attorneys who communicate their willingness to assist potential clients
are engaged in speech protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
The Court today undercuts this guarantee in an important class of cases
and unsettles leading First Amendment precedents, at the expense of
those victims most in need of legal assistance. With all respect for the
Court, in my view its solicitude for the privacy of victims and its
concern for our profession are misplaced and self-defeating, even upon
the Court’s own premises.

I take it to be uncontroverted that when an accident results in death or
injury, it is often urgent at once to investigate the occurrence,
identify witnesses, and preserve evidence. Vital interests in speech and
expression are, therefore, at stake when by law an attorney cannot
direct a letter to the victim or the family explaining this simple fact
and offering competent legal assistance. Meanwhile, represented and
better informed parties, or parties who have been solicited in ways more
sophisticated and indirect, may be at work. Indeed, these parties,
either themselves or by their attorneys, investigators, and adjusters,
are free to contact the unrepresented persons to gather evidence or
offer settlement. This scheme makes little sense. As is often true when
the law makes little sense, it is not first principles but their
interpretation and application that have gone awry.

Although I agree with the Court that the case can be resolved by
following the three-part inquiry we have identified to assess
restrictions on commercial speech, a preliminary observation is in
order. Speech has the capacity to convey complex substance, yielding
various insights and interpretations depending upon the identity of the
listener or the reader and the context of its transmission. It would
oversimplify to say that what we consider here is commercial speech and
nothing more, for in many instances the banned communications may be
vital to the recipients’ right to petition the courts for redress of
grievances. The complex nature of expression is one reason why even
so-called commercial speech has become an essential part of the public
discourse the First Amendment secures. If our commercial speech rules
are to control this case, then, it is imperative to apply them with
exacting care and fidelity to our precedents, for what is at stake is
the suppression of information and knowledge that transcends the
financial self-interests of the speaker.

I

As the Court notes, the first of the _Central Hudson_ factors to be
considered is whether the interest the State pursues in enacting the
speech restriction is a substantial one. The State says two different
interests meet this standard. The first is the interest "in protecting
the personal privacy and tranquility” of the victim and his or her
family. As the Court notes, that interest has recognition in our
decisions as a general matter; but it does not follow that the privacy
interest in the cases the majority cites is applicable here. The problem
the Court confronts, and cannot overcome, is our recent decision in
_Shapero_. In assessing the importance of the interest in that
solicitation case, we made an explicit distinction between direct,
in-person solicitations and direct-mail solicitations. _Shapero_, like
this case, involved a direct-mail solicitation, and there the State
recited its fears of "overreaching and undue influence.” We found,
however, no such dangers presented by direct-mail advertising. We
reasoned that "a letter, like a printed advertisement (but unlike a
lawyer), can readily be put in a drawer to be considered later, ignored,
or discarded. We pointed out that "the relevant inquiry is not whether
there exist potential clients whose ‘condition’ makes them susceptible
to undue influence, but whether the mode of communication poses a
serious danger that lawyers will exploit any such susceptibility.” In
assessing the substantiality of the evils to be prevented, we concluded
that "the mode of communication makes all the difference.” The direct
mail in _Shapero_ did not present the justification for regulation of
speech presented in _Ohralik_.

To avoid the controlling effect of _Shapero_ in the case before us, the
Court seeks to declare that a different privacy interest is implicated.
As it sees the matter, the substantial concern is that victims or their
families will be offended by receiving a solicitation during their grief
and trauma. But we do not allow restrictions on speech to be justified
on the ground that the expression might offend the listener. On the
contrary, we have said that these "are classically not justifications
validating the suppression of expression protected by the First
Amendment.” And in _Zauderer_, where we struck down a ban on attorney
advertising, we held that "the mere possibility that some members of the
population might find advertising offensive cannot justify suppressing
it. The same must hold true for advertising that some members of the bar
might find beneath their dignity.”

We have applied this principle to direct-mail cases as well as with
respect to general advertising, noting that the right to use the mails
is protected by the First Amendment. In _Bolger_, we held that a statute
designed to "shield recipients of mail from materials that they are
likely to find offensive” furthered an interest of "little weight,”
noting that "we have consistently held that the fact that protected
speech may be offensive to some does not justify its suppression.” It is
only where an audience is captive that we will assure its protection
from some offensive speech. Outside that context, "we have never held
that the Government itself can shut off the flow of mailings to protect
those recipients who might potentially be offended.” The occupants of a
household receiving mailings are not a captive audience, and the
asserted interest in preventing their offense should be no more
controlling here than in our prior cases. All the recipient of
objectionable mailings need do is to take "the short, though regular,
journey from mail box to trash can.” As we have observed, this is "an
acceptable burden, at least so far as the Constitution is concerned.” If
these cases forbidding restrictions on speech that might be offensive
are to be overruled, the Court should say so.

In the face of these difficulties of logic and precedent, the State and
the opinion of the Court turn to a second interest: protecting the
reputation and dignity of the legal profession. The argument is, it
seems fair to say, that all are demeaned by the crass behavior of a few.
The argument takes a further step in the amicus brief filed by the
Association of Trial Lawyers of America. There it is said that
disrespect for the profession from this sort of solicitation (but
presumably from no other sort of solicitation) results in lower jury
verdicts. In a sense, of course, these arguments are circular. While
disrespect will arise from an unethical or improper practice, the
majority begs a most critical question by assuming that direct-mail
solicitations constitute such a practice. The fact is, however, that
direct solicitation may serve vital purposes and promote the
administration of justice, and to the extent the bar seeks to protect
lawyers’ reputations by preventing them from engaging in speech some
deem offensive, the State is doing nothing more (as amicus the
Association of Trial Lawyers of America is at least candid enough to
admit) than manipulating the public’s opinion by suppressing speech that
informs us how the legal system works. The disrespect argument thus
proceeds from the very assumption it tries to prove, which is to say
that solicitations within 30 days serve no legitimate purpose. This, of
course, is censorship pure and simple; and censorship is antithetical to
the first principles of free expression.

II

Even were the interests asserted substantial, the regulation here fails
the second part of the _Central Hudson_ test, which requires that the
dangers the State seeks to eliminate be real and that a speech
restriction or ban advance that asserted state interest in a direct and
material way. The burden of demonstrating the reality of the asserted
harm rests on the State. Slight evidence in this regard does not mean
there is sufficient evidence to support the claims. Here, what the State
has offered falls well short of demonstrating that the harms it is
trying to redress are real, let alone that the regulation directly and
materially advances the State’s interests. The parties and the Court
have used the term "Summary of Record” to describe a document prepared
by the Florida Bar (Bar), one of the adverse parties, and submitted to
the District Court in this case. This document includes no actual
surveys, few indications of sample size or selection procedures, no
explanations of methodology, and no discussion of excluded results.
There is no description of the statistical universe or scientific
framework that permits any productive use of the information the
so-called Summary of Record contains. The majority describes this
anecdotal matter as "noteworthy for its breadth and detail,” but when
examined, it is noteworthy for its incompetence. The selective synopses
of unvalidated studies deal, for the most part, with television
advertising and phone book listings, and not direct-mail solicitations.
Although there may be issues common to various kinds of attorney
advertising and solicitation, it is not clear what would follow from
that limited premise, unless the Court means by its decision to call
into question all forms of attorney advertising. The most generous
reading of this document permits identification of 34 pages on which
direct-mail solicitation is arguably discussed. Of these, only two are
even a synopsis of a study of the attitudes of Floridians towards such
solicitations. The bulk of the remaining pages include comments by
lawyers about direct mail (some of them favorable), excerpts from
citizen complaints about such solicitation, and a few excerpts from
newspaper articles on the topic. Our cases require something more than a
few pages of self-serving and unsupported statements by the State to
demonstrate that a regulation directly and materially advances the
elimination of a real harm when the State seeks to suppress truthful and
nondeceptive speech.

It is telling that the essential thrust of all the material adduced to
justify the State’s interest is devoted to the reputational concerns of
the Bar. It is not at all clear that this regulation advances the
interest of protecting persons who are suffering trauma and grief, and
we are cited to no material in the record for that claim. Indeed, when
asked at oral argument what a "typical injured plaintiff gets in the
mail,” the Bar’s lawyer replied: "That's not in the record, and I don't
know the answer to that question.” Having declared that the privacy
interest is one both substantial and served by the regulation, the Court
ought not to be excused from justifying its conclusion.

III

The insufficiency of the regulation to advance the State’s interest is
reinforced by the third inquiry necessary in this analysis. Were it
appropriate to reach the third part of the _Central Hudson_ test, it
would be clear that the relationship between the Bar’s interests and the
means chosen to serve them is not a reasonable fit. The Bar’s rule
creates a flat ban that prohibits far more speech than necessary to
serve the purported state interest. Even assuming that interest were
legitimate, there is a wild disproportion between the harm supposed and
the speech ban enforced. It is a disproportion the Court does not bother
to discuss, but our speech jurisprudence requires that it do so.

To begin with, the ban applies with respect to all accidental injuries,
whatever their gravity. The Court’s purported justification for the
excess of regulation in this respect is the difficulty of drawing lines
between severe and less serious injuries, but making such distinctions
is not important in this analysis. Even were it significant, the Court’s
assertion is unconvincing. After all, the criminal law routinely
distinguishes degrees of bodily harm, and if that delineation is
permissible and workable in the criminal context, it should not be "hard
to imagine the contours of a regulation” that satisfies the reasonable
fit requirement.

There is, moreover, simply no justification for assuming that in all or
most cases an attorney’s advice would be unwelcome or unnecessary when
the survivors or the victim must at once begin assessing their legal and
financial position in a rational manner. With regard to lesser injuries,
there is little chance that for any period, much less 30 days, the
victims will become distraught upon hearing from an attorney. It is, in
fact, more likely a real risk that some victims might think no attorney
will be interested enough to help them. It is at this precise time that
sound legal advice may be necessary and most urgent.

Even as to more serious injuries, the State's argument fails, since it
must be conceded that prompt legal representation is essential where
death or injury results from accidents. The only seeming justification
for the State's restriction is the one the Court itself offers, which is
that attorneys can and do resort to other ways of communicating
important legal information to potential clients. Quite aside from the
latent protectionism for the established bar that the argument
discloses, it fails for the more fundamental reason that it concedes the
necessity for the very representation the attorneys solicit and the
State seeks to ban. The accident victims who are prejudiced to vindicate
the State’s purported desire for more dignity in the legal profession
will be the very persons who most need legal advice, for they are the
victims who, because they lack education, linguistic ability, or
familiarity with the legal system, are unable to seek out legal
services.

The reasonableness of the State’s chosen methods for redressing
perceived evils can be evaluated, in part, by a commonsense
consideration of other possible means of regulation that have not been
tried. Here, the Court neglects the fact that this problem is largely
self-policing: Potential clients will not hire lawyers who offend them.
And even if a person enters into a contract with an attorney and later
regrets it, Florida, like some other States, allows clients to rescind
certain contracts with attorneys within a stated time after they are
executed. The State’s restriction deprives accident victims of
information which may be critical to their right to make a claim for
compensation for injuries. The telephone book and general advertisements
may serve this purpose in part; but the direct solicitation ban will
fall on those who most need legal representation: for those with minor
injuries, the victims too ill informed to know an attorney may be
interested in their cases; for those with serious injuries, the victims
too ill informed to know that time is of the essence if counsel is to
assemble evidence and warn them not to enter into settlement
negotiations or evidentiary discussions with investigators for opposing
parties. One survey reports that over a recent 5-year period, 68% of the
American population consulted a lawyer. The use of modern communication
methods in a timely way is essential if clients who make up this vast
demand are to be advised and informed of all of their choices and rights
in selecting an attorney. The very fact that some 280,000 direct-mail
solicitations are sent to accident victims and their survivors in
Florida each year is some indication of the efficacy of this device.
Nothing in the Court’s opinion demonstrates that these efforts do not
serve some beneficial role. A solicitation letter is not a contract.
Nothing in the record shows that these communications do not at the
least serve the purpose of informing the prospective client that he or
she has a number of different attorneys from whom to choose, so that the
decision to select counsel, after an interview with one or more
interested attorneys, can be deliberate and informed. And if these
communications reveal the social costs of the tort system as a whole,
then efforts can be directed to reforming the operation of that system,
not to suppressing information about how the system works. The Court’s
approach, however, does not seem to be the proper way to begin elevating
the honor of the profession.

IV

It is most ironic that, for the first time since _Bates v. State Bar of
Arizona_, the Court now orders a major retreat from the constitutional
guarantees for commercial speech in order to shield its own profession
from public criticism. Obscuring the financial aspect of the legal
profession from public discussion through direct-mail solicitation, at
the expense of the least sophisticated members of society, is not a
laudable constitutional goal. There is no authority for the proposition
that the Constitution permits the State to promote the public image of
the legal profession by suppressing information about the profession’s
business aspects. If public respect for the profession erodes because
solicitation distorts the idea of the law as most lawyers see it, it
must be remembered that real progress begins with more rational speech,
not less. I agree that if this amounts to mere "sermonizing,” the
attempt may be futile. The guiding principle, however, is that full and
rational discussion furthers sound regulation and necessary reform. The
image of the profession cannot be enhanced without improving the
substance of its practice. The objective of the profession is to ensure
that "the ethical standards of lawyers are linked to the service and
protection of clients.”

Today’s opinion is a serious departure, not only from our prior
decisions involving attorney advertising, but also from the principles
that govern the transmission of commercial speech. The Court’s opinion
reflects a new-found and illegitimate confidence that it, along with the
Supreme Court of Florida, knows what is best for the Bar and its
clients. Self-assurance has always been the hallmark of a censor. That
is why under the First Amendment the public, not the State, has the
right and the power to decide what ideas and information are deserving
of their adherence. "The general rule is that the speaker and the
audience, not the government, assess the value of the information
presented.” By validating Florida’s rule, today’s majority is complicit
in the Bar's censorship. For these reasons, I dissent from the opinion
of the Court and from its judgment.

<img src="/assets/images/image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:4.45833in" />

Illustration for [Linda Greenhouse, _In the longtime war over
lawyer advertising, the latest shot leaves as many wounds as ever_, New
York Times, June 23, 1995, at
A23](https://www.nytimes.com/1995/06/23/us/bar-longtime-war-over-lawyer-advertising-latest-shot-leaves-many-wounds-ever.html)

_Questions:_

1. G. Stewart McHenry was disbarred in 1992 for masturbating in front
 of one female client and fondling another. He was also disciplined
 by the bar in 1985 and 1988, for brandishing a gun in his office,
 hitting a paralegal with a file and refusing to pay her when she
 quit, improperly withdrawing funds from his client trust account,
 and drunk driving, among other things.

2. Opponents of bar association rules limiting attorney advertisements
 and solicitation argue that the rules are motivated by the fear of
 increased competition and intended to protect the interests of
 established attorneys. Supporters of those rules argue that they
 reflect philosophical principles, including an aversion to
 "ambulance chasing.” Which argument do you find more compelling?
 Can both be true?

3. Justice O’Connor’s majority opinion relied on empirical evidence
 submitted by the bar showing that attorney solicitations sent to
 people after they or a family member suffered an injury caused
 harm and were unwanted. Justice Kennedy’s dissent questioned the
 credibility of the empirical evidence and argued that attorney
 solicitations could help consumers, who didn’t realize they had a
 potential claim or didn’t know who to contact. Did you find
 O’Connor’s empirical claims convincing? Do you think they provided
 adequate evidence of harm to overcome Justice Kennedy’s 1st
 Amendment objections?

<img src="/assets/images/image2.png" style="width:6.5in;height:8.43056in" />

Tampa Bay Times (St. Petersburg, Florida), Wed., Oct. 7, 1987, at 24

<img src="/assets/images/image3.png" style="width:3.65625in;height:8.6875in" />

The Tampa Tribune (Tampa, Florida), Tues., Oct 31, 1989, at 8

[1] The Box Tops, _Sweet Cream Ladies Forward March_, Dimensions (1969).
